---
title: Release 2.0
published: true
tags: []
author: Miguel Gamboa
permalink: 2018-03-01-Release-2.0.html
summary: >
    Full support for all existing HTML5 elements and attributes. 
    Moreover all attributes are strongly typed with enumerated types which
    restrict accepted values.
    Now HtmlFlow API is constructed with the support of an automated framework xmlet
    based on an XSD definition of the HTML5 syntax and rules. 
---

HtmlFlow version 2.0 has full support for all existing HTML5 elements and
attributes. 
Moreover all attributes are strongly typed with enumerated types which
restrict accepted values. 

Now HtmlFlow API is constructed with the support of an automated
framework [xmlet](https://github.com/xmlet/) based on an 
[XSD definition of the HTML5](https://github.com/xmlet/HtmlApi/blob/master/src/main/resources/html_5.xsd)
syntax and rules. 

Thus we remove the package `htmlflow.attributes` and `htmlflow.elements`,
which have been replaced by the types defined in `org.xmlet.htmlapi` library.
This new approach forces HtmlFlow API to keep consistency along all methods use.

So **version 2.0** introduces some changes, namely:

* All fluent methods have no parameters. For example, formerly when we
were specifying the text node of a paragraph or heading (such as,
`.p("my text")` or `.h2("my title")`), now we have to chain an invocation
to the `text()` method (such as, `.p().text("my text")` or
`.h2().text("my title")`).

* All fluent methods now return the created element.
Whenever we need to proceed with the parent element we may chain an
invocation to `.ยบ()`. For example, formerly when we wrote `.div().br().p()`
now we have to write `.div().br().ยบ().p()`. 
Moreover the statement `.div().br().p()` not even compiles, because HTML
does not allow a paragraph inside a break line element, so we will get a
compilation error. 

* Except for `.text()` which does not create an element but a text node
instead, the rest of fluent methods return the created element. 
For `.text()` it returns the element containing the text node (the `this`).

* The new method `ยบ()` returns the parent of an element. This method is
strongly typed so it returns exactly an instance of `T` where `T` is the
concrete class which extends `Element`. 
This is an important issue to respect the HTML structure and rules.

* Indentation. Now every element or text node is printed in a new line.
Formerly there were some exceptions, namely for text nodes which were
printed in the same line of the beginning tag.
These exceptions were removed.

* If you do not like the HtmlFlow print approach you are free to
implement your own `org.xmlet.htmlapi.ElementVisitor`.
See the `htmlflow.HtmlVisitor` implementation as a guideline.

* Removed default implementation of method `write()` in interface `HtmlWriter<T> `.
