---
title: Release 4.0 Support for Asynchronous Models
published: true
permalink: 2023-01-31-Release-4.0.html
summary: >
    New HtmlViewAsync subclass of HtmPage with a renderAsync().
    renderAsync() and writeAsync() return CompletableFuture of String and Void.
    New builder await(parent, model, onCompletion) -> ...) where the 
    onCompletion callback is used to signal HtmFlow that can proceed.
tags: []
author: Miguel Gamboa  
---

Migrating from HtmlFlow 3.x to 4.x

* Replace `DynamicHtml` and `StaticHtml` by new `HtmlView` and `HtmlDoc`.
Both inherit from new `HtmlPage` type. 

* The factory methods `DynamicHtml.view()` and `StaticHtml.view()` are now part of the class
`HtmlFlow` corresponding to its methods `HtmlFlow.view()` and `HtmlFlow.doc()`. 

* Removed the `HtmlWriter` interface which defined the standard API (methods `write` and `render`) 
to any kind of HTML page in the context of HtmlFlow.
Given the dynamic requirements of `DynamicHtml` (now called `HtmlView`) we need an argument model on
`render(model)` and `write(model)` methods.
Yet, those methods were illegal for `StaticHtml` (now called `HtmlDoc`) which does not depend on a 
model object given its static nature.
So, the `HtmlWriter` disappeared and the new `HtmlPage` base class does not define any write/render method.

* `HtmlPage`, `HtmlView` and `HtmlDoc`, none of them is no more parametrized (generic) with the type of the model. Now the model is only parametrized on the use of the builder `<M> dynamic(BiConsumer<E, M> consumer)`, where `E` is the parent HTML element and `M` is the type of the model.

* The model object is now passed as parameter of the consumer of a dynamic block (i.e. calling the builder `.dynamic((elem, model) -> ...)`). There is no more use of closures to capture the model object. Thus, the former 3.x style of dynamic block, such as: 
```java
public void template(DynamicHtml<Pet> view, Pet pet) {
    view.div().h2().dynamic(h2 -> pet.getName()).....
    ...
```

Is now on API 4.x:
```java
public void template(HtmlPage view) {
    view.div().h2().<Pet>dynamic((h2, pet) -> pet.getName()).....
    ...
```

* Partial (aka _fragments_) are the only place where we may use closure to capture a model object that has a different type from the enclosure template. In that case, remember when including that partial to use a `dynamic()` block to avoid storing it internally as a static HTML block and make it render whenever you call it with a model. Yet, if the partial use the same model as its container, then it should avoid the closure and use the model received on the consumer of its `dynamic(cons)` builder. For example, for views used inside a layout view.

* Disappear the `addPartial()` builder. A _partial_ (aka _fragment_) is only a consumer function of an HTML element, i.e. `Consumer<E extends Element>`. Thus, you may simply combine partials through higher-order functions composition. The element is the parent HTML where HtmlFlow will continue to emit HTML. We may also use consumers with additional arguments corresponding to models (i.e. context objects) used in the partial view (i.e. HTML fragment).
