---
title: Release 4.0 Support for Asynchronous Models
date: 2023-01-31
authors: [miguel]
tags: [release, feature]
description: New HtmlViewAsync with renderAsync() and writeAsync() returning CompletableFuture. New builder await() and strongly typed dynamic views.
---

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

This release introduces the following changes when migrating from HtmlFlow 3.x to 4.x:

- `DynamicHtml` and `StaticHtml` are replaced by `HtmlView` and `HtmlDoc`, respectively. Both inherit from the new `HtmlPage` type.
- The factory methods `DynamicHtml.view()` and `StaticHtml.view()` have been moved to the `HtmlFlow` class, becoming `HtmlFlow.view()` and `HtmlFlow.doc()`. {/_ truncate _/}
- The `HtmlWriter` interface, which previously defined standard methods (`write` and `render`) for all HTML pages, has been removed. With the dynamic nature of `HtmlView` (formerly `DynamicHtml`), `render(model)` and `write(model)` now require a model argument. These methods are not applicable to `HtmlDoc` (formerly `StaticHtml`), leading to the removal of `HtmlWriter`. The base class `HtmlPage` no longer defines write or render methods.
- `HtmlPage`, `HtmlView`, and `HtmlDoc` are no longer parameterized with the model type. The model is now parameterized only when using the builder `<M> dynamic(BiConsumer<E, M> consumer)`, where `E` is the parent HTML element and `M` is the model type.
- The model object is now passed directly as a parameter to the consumer of a dynamic block (e.g., calling `.dynamic((elem, model) -> ...)`), eliminating the need for closures to capture the model object.

For example, the dynamic blocks approach has been simplified:

<Tabs>
  <TabItem value="v3" label="HtmlFlow 3.x API">
    ```java title="Previous 3.x approach"
    public void template(DynamicHtml<Pet> view, Pet pet) {
        view.div().h2().dynamic(h2 -> pet.getName()).....
        ...
    ```
  </TabItem>
  <TabItem value="v4" label="HtmlFlow 4.x API" default>
    ```java title="New 4.x approach"
    public void template(HtmlPage view) {
        view.div().h2().<Pet>dynamic((h2, pet) -> pet.getName()).....
        ...
    ```
  </TabItem>
</Tabs>

- Partials are now the only place where closures can capture a model object of a different type than the enclosing template. When doing so, you must use a `dynamic()` block to prevent the partial from being stored as static HTML and ensure it renders whenever called with a model. If the partial uses the same model as its container, avoid the closure and instead use the model provided to the `dynamic(cons)` builder.
- The `addPartial()` builder has been removed. A partial is now simply a consumer function of an HTML element (`Consumer<E extends Element>`). You can combine partials using higher-order function composition. The element serves as the parent HTML where HtmlFlow continues to emit code. Additional arguments corresponding to context models can also be passed to partial views.
